A generation ago, Sky, then an upstart satellite broadcaster, outbid rivals for the rights to televise the Premier League. The deal revolutionized the fortunes of the TV service, and helped turn the British soccer league into one of the world’s most watched — and lucrative — in sports.
Another transformation now appears to be underway. Amazon, which is increasingly pushing beyond its e-commerce origins, won rights on Thursday to broadcast Premier League games in Britain for the first time.
Amazon’s deal highlights the seismic shifts happening in sports and television entertainment, as deep-pocketed digital outlets compete with traditional broadcasters like NBC, Disney and, in Europe, Sky. The fierce battle between Silicon Valley companies and historically dominant studios and broadcasters has extended from developing new scripted shows to broadcasting live sports.
The matches that Amazon will broadcast, available to its Prime members in Britain, are relatively minor. It will showcase 20, scheduled at times when there tends to be lower viewership than normal. But Amazon’s victory was in how it can deliver the games: While digital companies have typically bought only the digital streaming rights to sporting events, Amazon’s deal includes the exclusive rights for the matches it shows.
Amazon has been pushing aggressively into sports. Last year, the company agreed to pay about $50 million to stream 10 “Thursday Night Football” games, an arrangement that Amazon and the National Football League have since extended for even more money. Amazon also bought exclusive rights to show the United States Open tennis tournament in Britain, as well as the men’s ATP World Tour.
Amazon is not the only tech company hungry for live sports. Facebook made a major bid last year to stream cricket matches from the Indian Premier League and is streaming Major League Baseball games, while Twitter has streamed baseball and professional hockey games. Google’s YouTube and Hulu, a streaming service, have recently been promoting their live TV offerings by emphasizing the sports available on their networks, including the National Basketball Association finals currently underway.
For Amazon, the ability to show sports could be a way to get more people to sign up for Prime subscriptions, which cost $119 in the United States and about $106 in Britain. In his annual letter to shareholders this year, Amazon’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos, disclosed that 100 million people around the world had Prime subscriptions.
“Prime Video continues to drive Prime member adoption and retention,” Mr. Bezos wrote.
The company has also sought to develop scripted entertainment, earning awards and acclaim with shows like “Transparent” and “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel,” though it still lags behind competitors like Netflix.
In Britain, Amazon will share the broadcast rights to the Premier League with two British heavyweights — Sky Sports and BT Sport. Sky and BT will televise the vast majority of matches on offer, totaling 180 in all. Those matches will be at times that are likely to garner high levels of viewership.
The auction for Premier League broadcast rights was held in February, but only Sky Sports and BT won partial rights at the time.
“We welcome Amazon as an exciting new partner, and we know Prime Video will provide an excellent service on which fans can consume the Premier League,” Richard Scudamore, the Premier League’s executive chairman, said in a statement on Thursday.
Neither Amazon nor the Premier League said how much the company had paid for the rights. But Sky said after the auction in February that it had paid 3.58 billion pounds, or about $4.8 billion, over three years for its matches, while BT Sport paid a total of £885 million.
The transformation of the broadcast landscape mirrors one a quarter-century ago. Sky was only three years old in 1992 when it bid more than £300 million for the rights to televise live top-flight soccer matches in Britain. At the time, the move stunned the world of soccer and gave Sky an identity. The huge influx of cash — several times what had previously been paid for equivalent rights — helped Premier League clubs lure top players from all over the world.
Digital media companies have long proclaimed an interest in sports rights, but they have largely failed to enter competitive bids for marquee properties. And while sports leagues are eager to increase the number of bidders, they have shown a reluctance to turn over rights wholesale to digital partners, preferring instead to craft deals that include digital streaming on top of traditional TV broadcasting.
But the format of the Premier League’s auction makes it easier for digital media companies to compete. While most large rights packages in the United States are for seven seasons or more, the Premier League offers only three-season blocks, lowering the get-in cost. The 200 Premier League games on offer were also split into seven packages of 32 or 20 games each, making it easier for Amazon to dip a toe in the water, albeit in a smaller market than the United States.
The revenue for the Premier League rights in Britain is supplemented by income from broadcast deals elsewhere, including in the United States, where NBC televises the matches, and in China, where the digital broadcaster PPTV holds the rights.
